% !TeX program = pdfLaTeX
\documentclass[smallextended]{svjour3}       % onecolumn (second format)
%\documentclass[twocolumn]{svjour3}          % twocolumn
%
\smartqed  % flush right qed marks, e.g. at end of proof
%
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}

\usepackage[hyphens]{url} % not crucial - just used below for the URL
\usepackage{hyperref}
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}

%
% \usepackage{mathptmx}      % use Times fonts if available on your TeX system
%
% insert here the call for the packages your document requires
%\usepackage{latexsym}
% etc.
%
% please place your own definitions here and don't use \def but
% \newcommand{}{}
%
% Insert the name of "your journal" with
% \journalname{myjournal}
%

%% load any required packages here



% Pandoc citation processing


\begin{document}

\title{Perdiz arrow points from Caddo burial contexts aid in defining
discrete behavioral regions \thanks{Components of the analytical
workflow were developed and funded by a Preservation Technology and
Training grant (P14AP00138) to RZS from the National Center for
Preservation Technology and Training, as well as grants to RZS from the
Caddo Nation of Oklahoma, National Forests and Grasslands in Texas
(15-PA-11081300-033) and the United States Forest Service
(20-PA-11081300-074).} }


    \titlerunning{Perdiz arrow points from Caddo burial contexts}

\author{  Robert Z. Selden 1 \and  John E. Dockall 2 \and  }

    \authorrunning{ Selden and Dockall }

\institute{
        Robert Z. Selden 1 \at
     Heritage Research Center and Department of Biology, Stephen F.
Austin State University; and Cultural Heritage Department, Jean Monnet
University \\
     \email{\href{mailto:zselden@sfasu.edu}{\nolinkurl{zselden@sfasu.edu}}}  %  \\
%             \emph{Present address:} of F. Author  %  if needed
    \and
        John E. Dockall 2 \at
     Cox\textbar McClain Environmental Consultants, Inc. \\
     \email{\href{mailto:johnd@coxmcclain.com}{\nolinkurl{johnd@coxmcclain.com}}}  %  \\
%             \emph{Present address:} of F. Author  %  if needed
    \and
    }

\date{Received: date / Accepted: date}
% The correct dates will be entered by the editor


\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
Recent research in the ancestral Caddo area has yielded evidence for
distinct \emph{behavioral regions}, across which material culture from
Caddo burials---Hickory Engraved and Smithport Plain bottles as well as
Gahagan bifaces---have been found to express significant morphological
differences. This inquiry assesses whether Perdiz arrow points from
Caddo burials, assumed to reflect design intent, may differ across the
same geography, and extend the pattern of shape differences to a third
category of Caddo material culture. Perdiz arrow points collected from
the geographies of the northern and southern Caddo communities of
practice defined in a recent social network analysis were employed to
test the hypothesis that morphological attributes differ, and are
predictable, between the two communities. Results indicate significant
between-community differences in maximum length, width, stem length, and
stem width, but not thickness. Using the same traditional metrics
combined with the tools of machine learning, a predictive
model---support vector machine---was designed to assess the degree to
which community differences could be predicted, achieving a receiver
operator curve score of 97 percent, and an accuracy score of 94 percent.
The subsequent geometric morphometric analysis identified significant
differences in Perdiz arrow point shape and size, coupled with
significant results for modularity and morphological integration. These
findings bolster the argument for the establishment of at least two
discrete \emph{behavioral regions} in the ancestral Caddo area defined
by discernible morphological differences across three categories of
Caddo material culture.
\\
\keywords{
        American Southeast \and
        Caddo \and
        Texas \and
        archaeoinformatics \and
        computational archaeology \and
        machine learning \and
        museum studies \and
        digital humanities \and
        STEM \and
    }


\end{abstract}


\def\spacingset#1{\renewcommand{\baselinestretch}%
{#1}\small\normalsize} \spacingset{1}


\hypertarget{intro}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{intro}}

Perdiz arrow points generally follow two distinct manufacturing
trajectories; one that enlists flakes, and the other, blade flakes
\cite{RN8999,RN9361,RN9000,RN9364}. Lithic tool stone in the Caddo area
of northeast Texas is relatively sparse, consists primarily of chert,
quartzite, and silicified wood characteristic of the local geological
formations, which may contribute to local variation in both morphology
and size \cite{RN9364,RN439}. It has been demonstrated elsewhere that
Perdiz arrow points from northeast Texas vary significantly by time, raw
material, and burial context \cite{RN9364}. In outline, Perdiz arrow
points possess a:

\begin{quote}
{[}t{]}riangular blade with edges usually quite straight but sometimes
slightly convex or concave. Shoulders sometimes at right angles to stem
but usually well barbed. Stem contracted, often quite sharp at base, but
may be somewhat rounded. Occasionally, specimen may be worked on one
face only or mainly on one face \ldots{} {[}w{]}orkmanship generally
good, sometimes exceedingly fine with minutely serrated blade edges
\cite[504]{RN5769}.
\end{quote}

A social network analysis of Historic Caddo (post-CE 1680) sites in
northeast Texas demonstrated two spatially distinct \emph{behavioral
regions} \cite{RN8031} (Fig 1). The network analysis was limited to
Historic Caddo types; however, Formative Early Caddo (CE 800 -- 1200)
Gahagan bifaces and Caddo bottle types have been found to express
significantly different morphologies between the same two areas
\cite{RN8074,RN7927,RN8370,RN8312}, extending the temporal range of the
shape boundary. Gahagan bifaces from the ancestral Caddo area also
differ significantly in shape, size, and form from those recovered at
central Texas sites \cite{RN8322}, suggestive of a second shape boundary
between the Caddo region and central Texas.

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{ms-figs/figure1} \caption{Historic Caddo network generated using ceramic and lithic types, which include Perdiz arrow points (DOI 10.17605/OSF.IO/WD2ZT), illustrating the two (north [blue] and south [red]) Caddo behavioral regions. The regions were identified using a modularity statistic to identify those nodes more densely connected to one another than to the rest of the network .}\label{fig:fig1}
\end{figure}

The goal of this exploratory endeavor was to assess whether traditional
metrics collected for Perdiz arrow points support the \emph{shape
boundary} posited in recent social network and geometric morphometric
analyses, to determine whether linear metrics might be useful predictors
of regional membership, and---if so---to identify those morphological
features that articulate with each \emph{behavioral region} using
geometric morphometrics. It is assumed that complete Perdiz arrow points
included as offerings in Caddo burials represent the design intent of
the maker. Should the analysis yield significant results, it would
bolster the argument for at least two discrete Caddo \emph{behavioral
regions}; each empirically defined by discernible morphological
differences across three discrete categories of Caddo material culture.

\hypertarget{caddo-behavioral-regions}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Caddo behavioral
regions}}{Caddo behavioral regions}}\label{caddo-behavioral-regions}}

In a June 18, 1937 Works Progress Administration interview with Lillian
Cassaway, Sadie Bedoka---a Caddo-Delaware woman raised with the
Caddo---stated that:

\begin{quote}
Each {[}Caddo{]} clan had its own shape to make its pottery. One clan
never thought of making anything the same pattern of another clan.
\emph{You could tell who made the pottery by the shape}
\cite[395]{RN9357x}.
\end{quote}

General differences in Caddo ceramic forms have been noted elsewhere
(Krieger 1946; Perttula 2015; Selden Jr., et al.~2014); however, the
study of the Clarence H. Webb collection was the first to illustrate a
significant north-south geographic shape difference among Hickory
Engraved and Smithport Plain Caddo bottle types (Selden Jr.~2019). That
preliminary observation was later confirmed using more robust samples of
Hickory Engraved and Smithport Plain bottles (Selden Jr.~2018a, 2018b),
then expanded to include a greater variety of Caddo bottle types across
a larger spatial extent (Selden Jr.~2021b).

The co-presence of diagnostic artifact and attribute types have been
used to define the Caddo phases and periods that serve as a heuristic
tool to aid archaeologists in explaining the local cultural landscape.
The Historic Caddo network expounds upon those efforts, by building upon
the previously defined phases and periods, and emphasizing the dynamic
and manifold relational connections that transcend the currently-defined
categories (Selden Jr.~2021a). This was achieved by enlisting a
multi-scalar methodological approach (Knappett 2011; Mills, et
al.~2015), where the northern and southern communities were parsed into
constituent groups using diagnostic types paired with a modularity
statistic (Blondel, et al.~2008; Lambiotte, et al.~2014). A number of
the constituent groups identified by the networks were found to
articulate with known Caddo polities, while others were not (Selden
Jr.~2021a).

A subsequent analysis of Gahagan bifaces confirmed that a second
category of Caddo material culture expressed significant morphological
differences across the same geography as the Hickory Engraved and
Smithport Plain bottles (Selden Jr., et al.~2018). The morphology of
Gahagan bifaces from sites in central Texas was later found to differ
significantly when compared with those recovered from the Caddo region
(Selden Jr., et al.~2020). That Gahagan bifaces were found to differ
across two spatial boundaries was noteworthy, particularly since it has
regularly been assumed that these large bifaces were manufactured in
central Texas and arrived in the ancestral Caddo area as products of
trade or exchange (Selden Jr., et al.~2020; Selden Jr., et al.~2018).
Further, that Gahagan bifaces were found to differ across the same
geography as those communities posited in the Historic Caddo network
analysis suggested that the temporal range of the shape boundary might
extend to the Formative/Early Caddo period (CE 800 - 1250); a hypothesis
that was later confirmed in a more comprehensive analysis of Caddo
bottles (Selden Jr.~2021b).

Perdiz arrow points were among the diagnostic artifact types included in
the Historic Caddo network analysis (Selden Jr.~2021a), and it is
expected that they will differ across the shape boundary; however, it
remains unknown whether Caddo Perdiz arrow points might be said to
differ by or through temporal periods in the northern and southern
communities.

\hypertarget{methods-and-results}{%
\section{Methods and results}\label{methods-and-results}}

The sample of Perdiz arrow points used in this study consists of 67
intact specimens from Caddo burials in Camp, Nacogdoches, and Shelby
counties (supplementary materials). A standard suite of linear metrics
was collected for each specimen, including maximum length, width,
thickness, stem length, and stem width. Following collection, data were
imported to R (supplementary materials), where boxplots were produced,
along with a Principal Components Analysis (PCA) followed by analyses of
variance (ANOVA) to test whether the morphology of Perdiz arrow points
differs across the shape boundary.

Boxplots illustrate the distribution and means for each of the five
variables (Figure 2a-e), and the PCA (Figure 2f) illustrates over 92
percent of the variation in the sample among PC1 (84.65 percent) and PC2
(11.71 percent). The ANOVAs demonstrate significant differences in
Perdiz arrow point morphology among four of the five variables (maximum
length, width, stem length, and stem width) (supplemental materials).
Maximum thickness does not differ significantly between the northern and
southern communities, which led to the decision to conduct the
subsequent geometric morphometric analysis as a two dimensional, rather
than a three-dimensional, study (supplemental materials).

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics[width=0.95\linewidth]{ms-figs/figure2} \caption{Boxplots for a, maximum length; b, maximum width; c, maximum thickness; d, stem length; e, stem width, and f, PCA for linear metrics associated with the Perdiz arrow points. Additional information related to the analysis, including data and code needed to reproduce these results, can be found in the supplemental materials at https://aksel-blaise.github.io/perdiz3/.}\label{fig:fig2}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{predictive-model}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Predictive
model}}{Predictive model}}\label{predictive-model}}

For the support vector machine, linear data were imported to Python
(supplementary materials), where they were split into training (75
percent) and testing (25 percent) subsets. A standard scaler was used to
decrease the sensitivity of the algorithm to outliers by standardizing
features, and a nested cross validation of the training set was used to
achieve unbiased estimates of model performance, resulting in a mean
cross validation score of 86 percent (supplementary materials). The
model was then fit on the training set, yielding a receiver operator
curve score of 97 percent, and an accuracy score of 94 percent
(supplemental materials).

\hypertarget{geometric-morphometrics}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Geometric
morphometrics}}{Geometric morphometrics}}\label{geometric-morphometrics}}

Each of the arrow points was imaged using a flatbed scanner (HP Scanjet
G4050) at 600 dpi. The landmarking protocol developed for this study
(supplemental materials) includes six landmarks and 24 equidistant
semilandmarks to characterize Perdiz arrow point shape, and were applied
using the StereoMorph package in R (Olsen and Westneat 2015). The
characteristic points and tangents used in the landmarking protocol were
inspired by the work of Birkhoff (1933).

Landmark data were aligned to a global coordinate system (Kendall 1981,
1984; Slice 2001), achieved through generalized Procrustes
superimposition (Rohlf and Slice 1990) performed in R 4.1.1 (R Core
Development Team 2021) using the geomorph library v4.0.0 (Adams, et
al.~2018; Adams and Otárola-Castillo 2013). Procrustes superimposition
translates, scales, and rotates the coordinate data allowing for
comparisons among objects (Gower 1975; Rohlf and Slice 1990). The
geomorph package uses a partial Procrustes superimposition that projects
the aligned specimens into tangent space subsequent to alignment in
preparation for the use of multivariate methods that assume linear space
(Rohlf 1999; Slice 2001).

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{ms-figs/figure3} \caption{Results of generalized Procrustes analysis and boxplot of centroid size by region. Additional information related to the GPA, including those data and code needed to reproduce these results, can be found in the supplemental materials at https://aksel-blaise.github.io/perdiz3/.}\label{fig:fig3}
\end{figure}

Principal components analysis (Jolliffe 2002) was used to visualize
shape variation among the bifaces. The shape changes described by each
principal axis are commonly visualized using thin-plate spline warping
of a reference 3D mesh (Klingenberg 2013; Sherratt, et al.~2014). A
residual randomization permutation procedure (RRPP; n = 10,000
permutations) was used for all Procrustes ANOVAs (Adams and Collyer
2015; Collyer and Adams 2018), which has higher statistical power and a
greater ability to identify patterns in the data should they be present
(Anderson and Ter Braak 2003). To assess whether shape changes with size
(allometry), and differs by group (region), Procrustes ANOVAs (Goodall
1991) were also run that enlist effect-sizes (z-scores) computed as
standard deviates of the generated sampling distributions (Collyer, et
al.~2015). Procrustes variance was used to discriminate between regions
and compare the amount of shape variation (morphological disparity)
(Zelditch, et al.~2004), estimated as the Procrustes variance using
residuals of linear model fit (Adams, et al.~2018). A pairwise
comparison of morphological integration was used to test the strength of
integration between blade and basal morphology using a z-score (Adams
and Collyer 2016).

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{ms-figs/figure4} \caption{Principal components analysis plot (PC1/PC2) for Perdiz arrow points by community (gray squares, north; orange triangles, south). Additional information related to the PCA, including the full listing of results and those data and code needed to reproduce these results, can be found in the supplemental materials at https://aksel-blaise.github.io/perdiz3/.}\label{fig:fig4}
\end{figure}

A Procrustes ANOVA was used to test whether a significant difference
exists in Perdiz arrow point (centroid) size, and results indicate a
significant difference (RRPP = 10,000; Rsq = 0.30681; Pr(\textgreater F)
= 1e-04). A second Procrustes ANOVA was used to test whether a
significant difference exists in arrow point shape by region (northern
vs.~southern communities), and results indicate a significant difference
(RRPP = 10,000; Rsq = 0.0536; Pr(\textgreater F) = 0.0161). A comparison
of mean consensus configurations was used to characterize intraspecific
shape variation of Perdiz arrow points from the northern and southern
landscapes of practice. Differential morphology occurs in the basal
region, where the angle between the shoulder and base is more acute,
with a base that is generally shorter and narrower in the southern
landscape of practice than it is to the north (Figure 5).

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{ms-figs/figure5} \caption{Mean shapes for Perdiz arrow points from the northern (a, left), and southern (b, center) behavioral region. In the comparison of the two (c, right), the northern behavioral region is represented by gray circles, and the southern, by black. Additional information related to the mean shapes, including those data and code needed to reproduce these results, can be found in the supplemental materials at https://aksel-blaise.github.io/perdiz3/.}\label{fig:fig5}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{discussion}{%
\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}}

The previously-defined communities of practice can now be extended to
include Perdiz arrow points as a third category of Caddo material
culture (bottles, bifaces, and arrow points) that differs significantly
in morphology across the shape boundary. The shape boundary
delineates---empirically---two discrete behavioral regions in the Caddo
region.

Recent geometric morphometric studies have illustrated a clearly
discernible shape boundary between the northern and southern Caddo
behavioral regions that transcends three artifact categories from the
Formative through Historic Caddo periods. This study clearly illustrates
that those morphological differences among Perdiz arrow points found in
the northern and southern behavioral regions are predictable, and can be
identified using the standard suite of linear metrics regularly
collected as part of cultural resource management endeavors.

That the Perdiz arrow points from Caddo burials in the northern and
southern communities differ expands the scope to include a third class
of artifacts that include Caddo bottles, bifaces, and---now---arrow
points (Selden Jr, et al.~2021; Selden Jr.~2018a, 2018b, 2019, 2021b;
Selden Jr., et al.~2020; Selden Jr., et al.~2018).

\hypertarget{acknowledgments}{%
\section{Acknowledgments}\label{acknowledgments}}

We express our gratitude to the Caddo Nation of Oklahoma and the
Anthropology and Archaeology Laboratory at Stephen F. Austin State
University for the requisite permissions and access to the NAGPRA
objects from the Washington Square Mound site and Turner collections,
and to Tom A. Middlebrook for brokering access to the Perdiz arrow
points from burials at the Morse Mound site. Thanks also to the editor
and reviewers for their useful comments and constructive criticisms,
which further improved this manuscript.

\hypertarget{data-management}{%
\section{Data Management}\label{data-management}}

The data and analysis code associated with this project can be accessed
through the GitHub repository
\url{https://github.com/aksel-blaise/perdiz3} or the supplementary
materials \url{https://aksel-blaise.github.io/perdiz3/}; which are
digitally curated on the Open Science Framework at \newline DOI:
10.17605/OSF.IO/UK9ZD.


\bibliographystyle{spphys}
\bibliography{mybibfile.bib}

\end{document}
